The potential for QT prolongation and proarrhythmia
by non-antiarrhythmic drugs: clinical and regulatory
implications
Report on a Policy Conference of the European Society of
Cardiology
W. Haverkamp, G. Breithardt, A. J. Cammm, M. J. Janse, M. R. Rosen,
C. Antzelevitch, D. Escande, M. Franz, M. Malik, A. Moss, R. Shah, and the other
speakers in the sessions and the chairs of the workshops (see Appendix)
Preamble
The Policy Conference on ‘The Potential for QT
Prolongation and Proarrhythmia by Nonantiarrhythmic Drugs. Clinical and Regulatory
Implications’ was held at the European Heart House in
Sophia Antipolis, France, on the initiative of Gu¨nter
Breithardt, FESC, FACC, on 24 and 25 June 1999 after
formal approval by the Board of the European Society
of Cardiology (ESC).
The conference was organized under the auspices of
the ESC Committee for Scientific and Clinical Initiatives
by Gu¨nter Breithardt and Wilhelm Haverkamp,
Mu¨nster, Germany, with participation of representatives
of the Working Group on Arrhythmias of the ESC, the
American College of Cardiology, the American Heart
Association, the World Heart Federation, the European
Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products, the
Medicines Control Agency (UK), the Food and Drug
Administration (USA), the National Heart, Lung and
Blood Institute (USA), the Federal Institute for Drugs
and Medical Devices (Germany), and the Medical
Products Agency (Sweden).
The scientific and clinical basis of drug-induced QT
prolongation and proarrhythmia was summarized by
formal presentations. The speakers were chosen for their
particular competence in the relevant field. Furthermore, selected topics were discussed in detail in separate
workshops. This document represents the executive
summary of the Conference. It is based on written
reports composed by the speakers and the chairs of the
workshops. Before preparation of the final version of the
document, a draft was circulated to all participants of
the Conference for suggestions and comments. The
opinions expressed in this document are those of the
participants and do not necessarily reflect the official
position of their organisations or agencies. The meeting
was made possible by unrestricted educational grants to
the Committee for Scientific and Clinical Initiatives of
the ESC from several companies listed in the Appendix.
